Add Trino 369 release notes (#10553)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-369.md

# Release 369 (19 Jan 2022)

## General

* Display `Physical input read time` using most succinct time unit in `EXPLAIN
  ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`10576`)
* Fine tune request retry mechanism in HTTP event listener. ({issue}`10566`)
* Remove unnecessary fine-grained spill toggles. ({issue}`10591`)
* Prevent hanging query execution on failures with `phased` execution policy.
  ({issue}`10656`)
* Fix `UnsupportedOperationException` in `max_by` and `min_by` aggregation.
  ({issue}`10599 `)

> * Fix error message for function calls with lambda arguments. ({issue}`10423 `)

Reviewer: @mosabua Could you share why you decided to include this entry at https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/10552#issuecomment-1014770155? I'm asking this question because we didn't include the change for error message in the past release notes as far as I know.

Author: I wasnt aware of that policy. I can remove but honestly I think these kinds of things should be added. Up to you and @electrum

Author: wdyt @electrum ?

Author: Removed as discussed with @martint

## JDBC driver

* Fix memory leak when using `DatabaseMetaData`. ({issue}`10584 `,
  {issue}`10632`)

## BigQuery connector

* Fix query failure when reading columns with `numeric` or `bignumeric` type.
  ({issue}`10564`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Add support for [renaming schemas](/sql/alter-schema). ({issue}`10558`)
* Add support for setting [column comments](/sql/comment). ({issue}`10641`)
* Map ClickHouse `ipv4` and `ipv6` types to Trino `ipaddress` type.
  ({issue}`7098`)
* Allow mapping ClickHouse `fixedstring` or `string` as Trino `varchar` via the
  `map_string_as_varchar` session property. ({issue}`10601`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Druid connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for writing Bloom filters in ORC files. ({issue}`3939`)
* Allow flushing cache for specific partition with the

>   :func:`flush_metadata_cache` function. ({issue}`10385`)

Reviewer: The link ``` :func:`flush_metadata_cache` ``` is broken.

Author: updated to add anchor and change over to the md syntax .. sigh

* Ensure transaction locks in the Hive Metastore are released in case of query
  failure when querying Hive ACID tables.  ({issue}`10401`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10646`,
  {issue}`10512`)
* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when the schema location contains files
  deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)

> * Fix inserting into transactional table when task_writer_count > 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fix inserting into transactional table when `task_writer_count` > 1. ({issue}`9149`)
```

Author: done

  not enabled. ({issue}`8693`, {issue}`10441`)
* Improve performance when reading ORC files with Bloom filters with range
  predicates. ({issue}`4108`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10646`,
  {issue}`10512`)
* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when the schema location contains files
  deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)
* Fix inserting into transactional table when `task_writer_count` > 1.
  ({issue}`9149`)

## Iceberg connector

* Improve select query planning performance after write operations from Trino.
  ({issue}`9340`)
* Add Iceberg `$properties` system table.  ({issue}`10480`)
* Add support for `ALTER TABLE .. EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` statement. ({issue}`10497`)
* Respect Iceberg column metrics mode when writing. ({issue}`9938`)
* Improve performance when reading ORC files with Bloom filters with range
  predicates. ({issue}`4108`)
* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when the schema location contains files
  deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)
* Fix materialized view refresh when view a query references the same table
  multiple times. ({issue}`10570`)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Ensure table statistics are accumulated in a deterministic way from Iceberg column metrics. ({issue}`9716`)
```

Author: Added

# Release 369 (19 Jan 2022)

## General

* Add support for `Pacific/Kanton` time zone. ({issue}`10679`)
* Display `Physical input read time` using most succinct time unit in `EXPLAIN
  ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`10576`)
* Fine tune request retry mechanism in HTTP event listener. ({issue}`10566`)
* Add support for using PostgreSQL and Oracle with database backed resource
  groups. ({issue}`9812`)

> * Remove unnecessary fine-grained spill toggles. ({issue}`10591`)

Reviewer 3: Link to docs or list which ones are no longer supported.

Author: Done

* Use formatting specified in the SQL standard when casting `double` and `real`
  values to `varchar` type. ({issue}`552`)

> * Add experimental implementation of task level retries. ({issue}`9818`)

Reviewer 3: Add "This can be enabled via the xxx config option..." as appropriate.

* Prevent hanging query execution on failures with `phased` execution policy.
  ({issue}`10656`)
* Fix `UnsupportedOperationException` in `max_by` and `min_by` aggregation.
  ({issue}`10599`)
* Fix error message for function calls with lambda arguments. ({issue}`10423`)

> * Fix incorrect results or failure when casting date to bounded `varchar` type.

Reviewer 3: bounded `varchar` -> `varchar(n)`. 

There's no such a thing as "bounded varchar". `varchar(n)` and `varchar` are two distinct types (with an unfortunate common name)

## MySQL connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Oracle connector

* Map Oracle `date` to Trino `timestamp(0)` type. ({issue}`10626`)
* Fix performance regression of predicate pushdown on indexed `date` columns.
  ({issue}`10626`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Phoenix connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Pinot connector

* Add support for basic authentication. ({issue}`9531`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Add support for [renaming schemas](/sql/alter-schema). ({issue}`8939`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Redshift connector

* Add support for [renaming schemas](/sql/alter-schema). ({issue}`8939`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## SingleStore (MemSQL) connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## SQL Server connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## SPI

> * Remove legacy table layout objects. ({issue}`781`)

Reviewer 3: In particular, we've removed support for the `getTableLayout` SPI. We should mention that.

# Release 369 (19 Jan 2022)

## General

* Add support for `Pacific/Kanton` time zone. ({issue}`10679`)
* Display `Physical input read time` using most succinct time unit in `EXPLAIN
  ANALYZE VERBOSE`. ({issue}`10576`)

> * Fine tune request retry mechanism in HTTP event listener. ({issue}`10566`)

Author: I disagree. It conveys the fact that it was improved. More details are in the PR and could be in the docs .. but this is all we need for the release notes.

* Add support for using PostgreSQL and Oracle with database backed resource

>   groups. ({issue}`9812`)

Author: Adopted .. kind of.

* Remove unnecessary fine-grained spill toggles. ({issue}`10591`)
* Remove distinction between system and user memory to simplify
  cluster configuration. The configuration property
  `query.max-total-memory-per-node` is removed. Use `query.max-memory-per-node`
  instead. ({issue}`10574`)
* Use formatting specified in the SQL standard when casting `double` and `real`

>   values to `varchar` type. ({issue}`552`)

Reviewer 4: Can we elaborate - especially since not everyone has easy access to (or wants to) ANSI SQL standards.

Would "scientific notation" be correct?

Author: Not sure what it is .. also I think it does not belong into the release notes. If anything it should be in the docs.

* Remove ``bigquery.case-insensitive-name-matching.cache-ttl`` configuration
  option. It was previously ignored. ({issue}`10697`)
* Fix query failure when reading columns with `numeric` or `bignumeric` type.
  ({issue}`10564`)

## ClickHouse connector

* Upgrade minimum required version to 21.3. ({issue}`10703`)
* Add support for [renaming schemas](/sql/alter-schema). ({issue}`10558`)
* Add support for setting [column comments](/sql/comment). ({issue}`10641`)
* Map ClickHouse `ipv4` and `ipv6` types to Trino `ipaddress` type.
  ({issue}`7098`)
* Allow mapping ClickHouse `fixedstring` or `string` as Trino `varchar` via the
  `map_string_as_varchar` session property. ({issue}`10601`)
* Disable `avg` pushdown on `decimal` types to avoid incorrect results.
  ({issue}`10650`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Druid connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for writing Bloom filters in ORC files. ({issue}`3939`)
* Allow flushing cache for specific partition with the
  [flush_metadata_cache](hive_flush_metadata_cache) system procedure.

>   ({issue}`10385`)

Reviewer 4: It's not limited to specific partitions, it can be entire schemas, tables or partitions.

Maybe reword like `Allow flushing the metadata cache for specific schemas, tables or partitions with the...`?

* Add support for long lived AWS Security Token Service (STS) credentials for
  authentication with Glue catalog. ({issue}`10735`)
* Ensure transaction locks in the Hive Metastore are released in case of query
  failure when querying Hive ACID tables.  ({issue}`10401`)
* Disallow reading from Iceberg tables when redirects from Hive to Iceberg are
  not enabled. ({issue}`8693`, {issue}`10441`)

> * Improve performance when reading ORC files with Bloom filters with range
>   predicates. ({issue}`4108`)

Reviewer 4: "with Bloom filters with range" reads a bit weird?
```suggestion
* Improve performance of queries using range predicates when reading ORC files with Bloom filters. ({issue}`4108`)
```

Reviewer 4: Same in Iceberg.

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10646`,
  {issue}`10512`)

> * Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when the schema location contains files
>   deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)

Reviewer 4: WDYT?
```suggestion
* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when the schema location contains files that are not part of existing tables. ({issue}`10485`)
```

Reviewer 4: Same in Iceberg.

Author: ok

* Fix inserting into transactional table when `task_writer_count` > 1.
  ({issue}`9149`)
* Fix possible data corruption when writing data to S3 with streaming enabled.
  ({issue}`10710 `)

## Iceberg connector

> * Add Iceberg `$properties` system table.  ({issue}`10480`)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Add `$properties` system table which can be queries to inspect Iceberg table properties.  ({issue}`10480`)
```

* Add support for `ALTER TABLE .. EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` statement. ({issue}`10497`)
* Respect Iceberg column metrics mode when writing. ({issue}`9938`)
* Add support for long lived AWS Security Token Service (STS) credentials for
  authentication with Glue catalog. ({issue}`10735`)
* Improve performance when reading ORC files with Bloom filters with range
  predicates. ({issue}`4108`)
* Improve select query planning performance after write operations from Trino.
  ({issue}`9340`)
* Ensure table statistics are accumulated in a deterministic way from Iceberg
  column metrics. ({issue}`9716`)
* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when the schema location contains files
  deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)
* Fix materialized view refresh when view a query references the same table
  multiple times. ({issue}`10570`)

>  * Fix possible data corruption when writing data to S3 with streaming enabled.

Reviewer 4: Maybe mention the relevant config name?

Reviewer 4: Same in Hive

Author: it would be with hive.s3.streaming.enabled .. but this is documented and therefore should not be in the release notes. We just fixed an issue around it and not implemented it new or so.

* Remove distinction between system and user memory to simplify
  cluster configuration. The configuration property
  `query.max-total-memory-per-node` is removed. Use `query.max-memory-per-node`
  instead. ({issue}`10574`)
* Use formatting specified in the SQL standard when casting `double` and `real`
  values to `varchar` type. ({issue}`552`)
* Add support for `ALTER MATERIALIZED VIEW ... SET PROPERTIES`. ({issue}`9613`)
* Add experimental implementation of task level retries. This can be enabled by
  setting the `retry-policy` configuration property or the `retry_policy`
  session property to `task`. ({issue}`9818`)
* Improve query wall time by splitting workload between nodes in a more balanced
  way. Previous workload balancing policy can be restored via
  `node-scheduler.splits-balancing-policy=node`. ({issue}`10660`)
* Prevent hanging query execution on failures with `phased` execution policy.
  ({issue}`10656`)
* Catch overflow in decimal multiplication. ({issue}`10732`)
* Fix `UnsupportedOperationException` in `max_by` and `min_by` aggregation.
  ({issue}`10599`)
* Fix incorrect results or failure when casting date to `varchar(n)` type.
  ({issue}`552`)

> * Fix issue where the length of log file names grow indefinitely upon log

Reviewer 3: Missing link to PR: https://github.com/trinodb/trino/pull/10738

Author: done

  {issue}`10512`)

## Hive connector

* Add support for writing Bloom filters in ORC files. ({issue}`3939`)
* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when THE schema location contains files
  deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)
* Fix inserting into transactional table when task_writer_count > 1

## Iceberg connector

* Prevent data loss during `DROP SCHEMA` when THE schema location contains files
  deep in the directory tree, but not tables. ({issue}`10485`)
* Add support for `ALTER TABLE .. EXECUTE OPTIMIZE` statement. ({issue}`10497`)

## MySQL connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Oracle connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## PostgreSQL connector

* Add support for [renaming schemas](/sql/alter-schema). ({issue}`8939`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## Redshift connector

* Add support for [renaming schemas](/sql/alter-schema). ({issue}`8939`)
* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

> ## SingleSource (MemSQL) connector

Reviewer 3: SingleStore?

Author: oops .. fixed

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## SQL Server connector

* Fix spurious errors when metadata cache is enabled. ({issue}`10544`,
  {issue}`10512`)

## SPI

> * Remove legacy table layout objects from SPI

Author: added
